 BACKGROUND
 
 - What is a diatonic scale?
 
 Strictly speaking, the term diatonic refers to a particular family of musical scales with 7 notes per octave, that are built out of whole steps (whole tones) and half steps (semitones) in such a way that the steps are distributed across the octave as evenly as possible (within the context of a whole step / half step system).

Informally though, the term 'diatonic' is also used to describe any musical scale with 7 notes per octave. This contrasts it with, for example, pentatonic scales (which have only 5 notes per octave) and with the chromatic scale (which contains all of the available notes in 12 tone equal temperament, the standard tuning system of Western music). 

A whole step / half step note system divides the octave in to 12 steps, so you can think of the process of making a diatonic scale as picking 7 out of 12 notes. If you have ever played a piano-style keyboard, you may have noticed that there are 7 white keys and 5 black keys for each octave. This is no coincidence. The piano keyboard is essentially a diatonic design, with its 'natural' notes being the white keys. The black keys 'fill the gaps' between the notes that are a whole tone apart, and because there are only five such gaps, there are only five black keys. Some of the white keys (B and C, E and F) are just a semitone apart, and these don't have a black key in between them.

Using only the white keys, you can play 7 diatonic scales on a piano: one for each note you start on. Of course in some sense, these are all the same scale: they contain exactly the same notes, the only difference between them is what key is used as the starting note or 'root'. This makes a big difference though: these scales are called the 7 diatonic 'modes' and each of these modes contains its own distinct mood or flavour. However, the possibilities don't end there: you can also make scales using a combination of black and white keys. Some of these are just shifted versions of the 7 'natural' modes: they create the same pattern of whole steps and half steps, just starting from a different key. Some other scales use a different pattern altogether, and can only be played with a combination of black and white keys.

On the piano, the white keys are called A, B, C, D, E, F and G. The black keys don't get their own letter, instead they are 'raised' or 'lowered' versions of the natural notes, that are called thing like Eb ('E flat' - the lowered version of E, which is the black key in between D and E) or C# ('C sharp' - the raised version of C, which is the black key in between C and D).

What all musically useful 7 note scales have in common, is that they have 'one of each note'. Playing all the white keys on a piano creates a scale with 7 different letters, which works perfectly, but if you were to start on the note A and then play every next note up until you reached the seventh, you would get a sequence like this: A, Bb, B, C, C#, D, Eb. While this is a 7 note scale in some sense, it isn't a very musically useful scale, and this is because it doesn't have 'one of each note'. Instead, there are two versions of 'B' and two version of 'C', while the letters F and G are missing from the scale altogether. On the other hand, as long as you make sure that your scale includes a note for each of the 7 letters, you're very likely to produce a musical sounding scale, even if the sequence is something complicated like A, Bb, C#, D, Eb, F#, G.

The keyboard of the Arithmophone only has seven notes per octave, so it works a little different from a piano. You don't have 12 notes at your fingertips at all times, but you choose which notes you want to map to the keyboard by selecting a key and scale instead. This is more similar to instruments like the harp or the harmonica, that are tuned to a specific scale - except that retuning to a different scale or key is instant and effortless on the Diatone.

All common musical keys are available on the Diatone, from the central D (the natural center point because it is in the middle of the sequence a-b-c-D-e-f-g) all the way up to G# and down to Ab.

The scales that are available on the Diatone keyboard are divided in to three groups: in the first group are the 7 modes of the strictly diatonic scales, labeled with their traditional names from Locrian to Lydian. In the second and third group are some melodic and harmonic scales that are not 'strictly' diatonic, but nonetheless satisfy the 'one of each note' requirement. All of these are scales that are commonly used across different musical traditions.




 
 - What is just intonation?
 
 
Just intonation is a a way of tuning that is based on the natural harmonics of musical notes. This is most easily explained by using a stringed instrument like a violin as an example, although it applies just as much to any other musical instrument, from saxophones to synthesizers, and also to the human voice.
                
When you play an open A string on a violin, the string vibrates at a rate of 440 times per second (assuming the violin is in standard tuning). This rate is called the frequency, and is usually expressed in Hertz (Hz). But the sound you hear is not just a single frequency, because the string also vibrates at multiples of its root frequency, such as 880 Hz (2x440), 1320 Hz (3x440), and so on. These multiples of the root frequency are called overtones or harmonics. Together they combine with the root frequency to produce a complex sound that gives the instrument its own particular tone colour or timbre.

On an instrument where you can touch the strings directly, like a violin or a guitar, it is very easy to check this for yourself. If you lightly touch the string at exactly half the length of the string (over the 12th fret on a guitar), you will mute the root frequency and accentuate the second harmonic, if you place your finger at one third of the length (over the 7th fret on a guitar), you will hear the third harmonic accentuated, et cetera. If after that you just play the open string again, you may be able to hear how the full sound contains all of these individual overtones.

All the harmonic frequencies have a certain whole number proportion to the root frequency: 2x, 3x, 4x, 5x and so on. In principle this goes on forever, but the relative loudness of the overtones decreases as their frequency increases, so in practice the first few overtones are much more prominent than the higher ones. Now, if we listen to the harmonics in isolation again, we can hear that they correspond to different notes. The second harmonic of the A string produces another A, an octave higher, the third harmonic produces an E, the fourth harmonic is an A again, 2 octaves higher this time, and the fifth harmonic produces a C#. 

Each of the overtones of a note stands in a certain ratio to its root frequency, and each of those ratios correspons to a certain note. We can use this fact to tune the other strings of the violin (or the other notes on any instrument in general) in relation to one specific root frequency, and this is in fact precisely what just intonation is. When we sound the second harmonic of the A string, which produces the note E, and then tune our E string so that it resonates perfectly with the harmonic, we are using just intonation, plain and simple.

 We can use the principle of harmonic proportions to find a ratio for any note we might want to tune to. We have just established that for the note A, 2:1 and 4:1 just give us more A notes in higher octaves. And in general, multiplying or dividing by 2 will give us the same note in a different octave. But all the odd ratios provide us with new notes: if 1:1 is A, then 3:1 is E, and 5:1 is C#. But we can go the other way as well: 1:3 is D (because 3:1 on D is A) and 1:5 is F (because 5:1 on F is A). We can also combine ratios: 5:3 is F#, because 1:3 is D and 5:1 on D is F# (and 5:1 x 1:3 is 5:3).
 
 [3-5 grid]
 
 Simply by combining factors of 2, 3 and 5, we can create any of the diatonic scales. For example, the ratios of a D major scale might be: 1/1 (D), 9/8 (E), 5/4 (F#), 4/3 (G), 3/2 (A), 5/3 (B), 15/8 (C#), 2/1 (D). 
 
 
 
 To avoid confusion, we should pay careful attention to the distinction between scale position and harmonic position. For example, in the C major scale, E is the third note and for this reason, the interval from C to E is usually called the (major) third, but E is the fifth harmonic of C. In contrast, G is the fifth note of the scale and usually called the (perfect) fifth, even though G is the third harmonic of C. 
 
 An important subtlety of just intonation is that, unlike in 12 tone equal temperament standard tuning, there are multiple options for each note. For example, for D is 1:1, there is a C at 9:5 (because 3:1 on D is A, 3:1 on A is E, 1:5 on E is C and 3/1 x 3/1 x 1/5 = 9/5), but there is also a C at 1:9 (because 1:3 on D is G, 1:3 on G is C and 1/3 x 1/3 is 1/9). These notes share the same name, but they don't have the same frequency (because 9/5 is not equal to 1/9, not even when we change the latter to 16/9 so they fall in the same octave). The distance is subtle enough that standard tuning can 'sweep it under the rug' and represent both ratios with just a single note, but it is definitely audible, and becomes particularly apparent when multiple notes are played simultaneously in chords. And these are just two of the options for the C note on D: there are other, more 'exotic' candidates as well, most notably the 'pure harmonic seventh' or 7/1 ratio. With just intonation, there is essentially an infinite number of different notes, which can be good or a bad thing, depending on your particular situation.



 - What is equal temperament?
 
 
 - Scales and modes
 
 - The Diatone scale selection
 
 
 - Diatone scale diagrams
 
